### A simple Linux kernel block device driver

This code defines a simple Linux kernel module that implements
a block device driver backed by RAM, commonly referred to as a
"RAM disk". It allows the system to treat a portion of system
memory as if it were a block device (like a disk), meaning it
can be formatted, mounted, and used to store files, albeit
non-persistently (since the contents will be lost when the
module is removed or the system is rebooted).

Here's a detailed breakdown of the code.

#### 1. Includes

	c code

	#include <asm/page.h>
	#include <linux/blk_types.h>
	#include <linux/sysfb.h>
	#include <linux/module.h>
	#include <linux/blkdev.h>
	#include <linux/blk-mq.h>
	#include <linux/idr.h>

These headers include various kernel functions and definitions
required for block devices, memory management, modules, and
request handling. Key headers:

asm/page.h: Provides page size definitions (used in block size
setup).

blk_types.h, blkdev.h, blk-mq.h: Used for block devices and
multiqueue request handling.

module.h: Defines macros and functions for building kernel
modules.

#### 2. Module Parameters

	c code

	unsigned long capacity_mb = 40;
	module_param(capacity_mb, ulong, 0644);
	MODULE_PARM_DESC(capacity_mb, "capacity of the block device in MB");
	EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL(capacity_mb);

capacity_mb defines the capacity of the RAM disk in megabytes
(default 40 MB).

module_param makes this parameter configurable via module
loading allowing it to be set from user space (insmod).

EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL allows the parameter to be accessed from
other GPL-licensed modules.

Parameters for:

max_segments: Defines the maximum number of segments in a
request.

max_segment_size: Defines the maximum size of each segment.

lbs (logical block size) and pbs (physical block size): Define
the sizes of logical and physical blocks (typically equal to
PAGE_SIZE).

#### 3. Block Device Structure

	c code

	struct blk_ram_dev_t {
		sector_t capacity;
		u8 *data;
		struct blk_mq_tag_set tag_set;
		struct gendisk *disk;
	};

This structure represents the RAM-backed block device:

capacity: Total capacity in sectors.

data: Pointer to the memory region used as the storage.

tag_set: Used by the block multiqueue (blk-mq) layer to
manage request tags.

disk: Represents the device at a higher level, connecting
to the kernel's block layer.

#### 4. Request Handling Function

	c code

	static blk_status_t blk_ram_queue_rq(struct blk_mq_hw_ctx *hctx, const struct blk_mq_queue_data *bd)

This function processes block requests for reading or writing:

hctx: Represents the hardware context for the queue.

bd: Provides details about the current request.

Within this function:

It iterates over all segments in the request using
rq_for_each_segment.

For each segment, it calculates the buffer location, checks if
the request is valid, and copies data between the RAM disk and
the buffer:

If the request is a read (REQ_OP_READ), it copies from the RAM
disk to the buffer.

If the requestis a write (REQ_OP_WRITE), it copies from the
buffer to the RAM disk.

blk_mq_end_request is called to complete the request.

#### 5. Operations and Initialization

	c code

	static const struct blk_mq_ops blk_ram_mq_ops = {
		.queue_rq = blk_ram_queue_rq,
	};

This structure defines the operations for the block multiqueue
(blk-mq), and it associates the blk_ram_queue_rq function with
the queue_rq callback.

	c code

	static const struct block_device_operations blk_ram_rq_ops = {
		.owner = THIS_MODULE,
	};

This structure defines basic operations for the block device
(blk_ram_rq_ops), but the only operation here is setting the
owner of the module.


#### 6. Module Initialization

	c code

	static int __init blk_ram_init(void)

This function initializes the module:

Registers a block device (register_blkdev), obtaining a major
number.

Allocates memory for the block device structure (blk_ram_dev_t).

Allocates memory for the RAM disk itself using kvmalloc (kernel
virtual memory allocation).

Sets up the tag_set for the blk-mq layer and allocates tags
using blk_mq_alloc_tag_set.

Allocates a gendisk structure (representing the block device).

Sets block sizes (logical and physical) using
blk_queue_logical_block_size and blk_queue_physical_block_size.

Registers the disk with the block subsystem using add_disk.

#### 7. Module Exit

	c code

	static void __exit blk_ram_exit(void)

This function cleans up when the module is unloaded:

Deletes the disk with del_gendisk.

Frees allocated memory for the disk and RAM.

Unregisters the block device.

#### 8. Module Macros

	c code

	MODULE_LICENSE("GPL");
	MODULE_DESCRIPTION("Generic Block Driver Example");
	MODULE_VERSION("1.0");

These macros define the module's metadata, such as its license
(GPL), description, and version.

#### How the Driver Works

Storage Allocation: A chunk of RAM is allocated
(blk_ram_dev->data) and is treated as a block device.

Request Handling: The blk_ram_queue_rq function processes block
I/O requests by copying data between the RAM and the
user-provided buffer.

Module Interface: The block device is exposed to user space,
allowing it to be used just like a regular hard drive. The
blk_mq_alloc_disk and add_disk functions connect the device
to the kernelâ€™s block device subsystem.
